# 4. Files in containers

!!! circle-question "Overview"

    Questions

    - How do I make data available in a container?
    - What data is made available by default in a container?

    Objectives

    - Understand that some data from the host system is usually made available by default within a container
    - Learn more about how handles users and binds directories from the host filesystem.


The way in which user accounts and access permissions are handled in Apptainer containers is very different from that in Docker (where you effectively always have superuser/root access). When running a Apptainer container, you only have the same permissions to access files as the user you are running as on the host system.

In this episode we’ll look at working with files in the context of Apptainer containers and how this links with Apptainer’s approach to users and permissions within containers.


Users within a Apptainer container
The first thing to note is that when you ran whoami within the container shell you started at the end of the previous episode, you should have seen the username that you were signed in as on the host system when you ran the container.

!!! info ""

    For example, if my username were `training1`, I’d expect to see the following:

    ```bash
    $ apptainer shell lolcow_latest.sif
    Apptainer> whoami
    training1
    ```
    But hang on! I downloaded a version of the `lolcow_latest.sif` image from a public container repo. I haven’t customised it in any way. How is it configured with my own user details?!

    If you have any familiarity with Linux system administration, you may be aware that in Linux, users and their Unix groups are configured in the `/etc/passwd` and `/etc/group` files respectively. In order for the shell within the container to know of my user, the relevant user information needs to be available within these files within the container.

    Assuming this feature is enabled within the installation of Apptainer on your system, when the container is started, Apptainer appends the relevant user and group lines from the host system to the `/etc/passwd` and `/etc/group` files within the container [1].

    This means that the host system can effectively ensure that you cannot access/modify/delete any data you should not be able to on the host system and you cannot run anything that you would not have permission to run on the host system since you are restricted to the same user permissions within the container as you are on the host system.


## Files and directories within a Apptainer container
Apptainer also binds some directories from the host system where you are running the `apptainer` command into the container that you’re starting. Note that this bind process is not copying files into the running container, it is making an existing directory on the host system visible and accessible within the container environment. If you write files to this directory within the running container, when the container shuts down, those changes will persist in the relevant location on the host system.

There is a default configuration of which files and directories are bound into the container but ultimate control of how things are set up on the system where you are running Apptainer is determined by the system administrator. As a result, this section provides an overview but you may find that things are a little different on the system that you’re running on.

One directory that is likely to be accessible within a container that you start is your home directory. You may also find that the directory from which you issued the apptainer command (the current working directory) is also mapped.

The mapping of file content and directories from a host system into a Apptainer container is illustrated in the example below showing a subset of the directories on the host Linux system and in a Apptainer container: